---
date: 2023-11-16T18:00:00+01:00
tags:
  - stack-based-virtual-machines
  - java
  - rust
series: ["Writing a JVM in Rust"]
title: A JVM in Rust part 8 - Retrospective
---

This is the last post in my pretty long series about my toy [JVM in Rust](https://github.com/andreabergia/rjvm). In this post, I will do a sort of retrospective, discussing what went well and what didn't, with Rust and with the project itself.

# Rust retro

## The good parts

### Sum types

I have [blogged about it before]( {% ref "2022-11-30-languages-opinion-part-2-rust.markdown" %} ), but it bears repeating - Rust sum types are _fantastic_. Look at this beauty:

```rust
/// Possible execution result of an instruction.
enum InstructionCompleted<'a> {
    /// Indicates that the instruction executed was one
    /// of the return family. The caller should stop
    /// the method execution and return the value.
    ReturnFromMethod(Option<Value<'a>>),

    /// Indicates that the instruction was not a return,
    /// and thus the execution should resume from
    /// the instruction at the program counter address.
    ContinueMethodExecution,
}
```

The fact that alternatives can have (different) payloads makes them very powerful and expressive for modeling. And, of course, Rust has [powerful pattern-matching features](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch18-00-patterns.html) for working with enums.

Of course, most functional programming languages had this for ages, but Rust is the first "mainstream" language I have used with this feature. Of course, now this pattern is also making its way into Java, via [sealed classes](https://www.baeldung.com/java-sealed-classes-interfaces) and [record pattern matching](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/20/language/record-patterns.html).

### The question mark operator `?`

Most function calls can fail. Rust models errors with the sum type [Result](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/result/), which is a very nice approach as [I have discussed before](https://andreabergia.com/blog/2023/05/error-handling-patterns/). The thing I love the most about this approach, though, are two:

- the fact that _everything_ uses the same approach - the standard library, and any crate you pick on the internet;
- and the `?` operator, which makes fail-fast simple to implement.

For example, the current value stack might be empty while executing a method, and thus `pop` could fail. I have simply written this:

```rust
let result = self.pop()?;
```

If `pop` returns a "stack empty" error, the question mark operator will return and propagate the error to the caller. Otherwise, it will unwrap the value from the returned `Result`. It is _super_ nice to use in practice - it is not as "hidden" as exceptions, but almost effortless.

### The compiler errors

`rustc`, the rust compiler, famously has [great compiler errors](https://ferrous-systems.com/blog/the-compiler-is-your-friend/), for example:

```sh
 Compiling playground v0.0.1 (/playground)
error[E0596]: cannot borrow `sausage` as mutable, as it is not
declared as mutable
 --> src/main.rs:9:5
  |
8 | fn belka_takes_bite_off(sausage: String) {
  |                       -------- help: consider changing this to be
mutable: `mut sausage`
9 |     sausage.truncate(5);
  |     ^^^^^^^^ cannot borrow as mutable

error: aborting due to previous error

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0596`.
error: could not compile `playground`.

To learn more, run the command again with --verbose.
```

The error messages contain a lot of details, and sometimes even a suggestion about how to fix the errors!

### Cargo and the crates ecosystem

[Cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/), the rust package manager, is pretty fantastic. Adding a library is trivial: `cargo add xxx`. Building and testing are just `cargo build` and `cargo test`. No craziness like in node-land, where each project can have a million different tasks and ways to do things (and don't get me started on [`yarn`](https://dev.to/thejaredwilcurt/bun-hype-how-we-learned-nothing-from-yarn-2n3j)). I love having _one_ good standard. In my experience, Cargo _just works™️_.

There are also a lot of good libraries for Rust available - when I had to do some not-so-common things, like reading a [Cesu-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CESU-8) (a legacy Unicode format used in the `class` file format, from a time when UTF-8 was not yet [the only standard you should learn](https://utf8everywhere.org/)) encoded string, I could easily find a library that does that.

Another example: I needed to store some bookkeeping information for each allocated object, such as its length. To keep things compact, I wanted to use just one word and really squeeze the bits. Rather than doing bit arithmetic by hand, I found immediately the crate [bitfield-struct](https://crates.io/crates/bitfield-struct).

### Rustfmt

Similarly to [Go](https://pkg.go.dev/cmd/gofmt), Rust has [rustfmt](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustfmt), _the_ code formatter. I love having **one** uniform style for all code in a given language - there's no discussion about how to format the code, no styles that differ from one project to the next, and no "whitespace" or "reformat" commits in the history. I have set my editor to invoke `rustfmt` on save, and I am happy.

### Clippy

[Clippy](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-clippy) is the Rust linter, and it is quite useful. It has taught me a few things, and I have never had a false positive. I recommend enabling it and listening to it when working with Rust.

## The not-so-amazing parts

### The borrow checker

Rust is famously not an easy language to learn. A lot of its complexity comes from the ownership mechanism and the borrow checker rules. After writing some eight thousand lines of non-trivial code, I do feel like I have a reasonable understanding of it, but it was pretty painful at the beginning.

The ownership mechanism is _the_ differentiating feature of Rust, and it is pretty useful in practice, but it does make a lot of things more complicated, such as [self-references](https://rust-unofficial.github.io/too-many-lists/) or building a struct where [one field is a reference to some parts of another](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/32300132/why-cant-i-store-a-value-and-a-reference-to-that-value-in-the-same-struct?rq=1).

I also used pointers and `unsafe` quite a bit, given that I was building something rather low-level like a garbage collector. They are, in my opinion, pretty nice to use in Rust, even if a bit verbose.

I have picked up a couple of tricks for dealing with the borrow checker errors. The first is that, often, a simple `.clone()` can save the day.

The second one is trying to be explicit about lifetimes. When trying to understand compiler errors about reference lifetime, making the lifetime explicit made a lot of things clearer for me. For example, writing explicitly things such as:

```rust
fn get_code<'a>(class_and_method: &'a ClassAndMethod)
    -> Result<&'a ClassFileMethodCode, VmError> {
```

makes the compiler complain about the `'a` lifetime, rather than about an anonymous one, and this can make errors clearer.

### Error handling

As much as I love error handling with Rust, some things bit me. In particular, I am far more used to languages with exceptions that give you a nice stack trace whenever there's an error. In Rust, you do _not_ get a stack trace for free - which makes sense for a system language, but it still made debugging _a pain_.

This was compounded by an initial bad decision that I took in the beginning, where I used a generic [`VmError::ValidationError`](https://github.com/andreabergia/rjvm/blob/3d48ee09632b8b939fd570f6aebc5fabcc23254f/vm/src/vm_error.rs#L31) for any sort of unexpected situation - empty stack, invalid types, and so on - made debugging errors during the implementation of the various instructions _very_ painful, as there was no simple way to get any information about _where_ the error happened. This is exactly the sort of issue that things like the [anyhow](https://docs.rs/anyhow/latest/anyhow/) crate solve, with its context feature - though of course it can be implemented without any extra crate. My problem is that I underestimated this, and it led to a lot of pain. It is a thing that I think needs to be considered quite early in a project, and it seems to lead to a bit of boilerplate.

## Other notes

### Compilation times

The compilation times were - honestly - mostly fine. It helps that I wrote the vast majority of the code on an M1 Pro, though. Rebuilding my own code is close enough to be instantaneous that it wasn't really noticeable, but doing a clean build, which rebuilds all the libraries, takes about 12 seconds.

I have used both Visual Studio Code and IntelliJ to write this project, and both showed the compilation errors or clippy warnings very fast on save - again, fast enough to not be annoying. [`rust-analyzer`](https://rust-analyzer.github.io/) does a great job with the suggestions.

The [GitHub actions](https://github.com/andreabergia/rjvm/blob/main/.github/workflows/rust.yml) pipeline is generally somewhere between one and two minutes, thanks to [caching](https://github.com/Swatinem/rust-cache) - pretty great.

### Testing

Maybe I am just too used to Java projects, but I still find having the test code in the same file as the source is a bit strange. Nevertheless, I do not have any particular problem with the testing system built-in the standard library - it works well. I have ended up using [cargo nextest](https://nexte.st/) just to have the integration tests of the VM, which read the whole `rt.jar` (60+ MB), run in parallel.

## Conclusion

I would say that I am very happy with Rust. Most of my problems were due to my ignorance of the language or its best practices. I always felt pretty productive, even though the refactoring tools aren't really up to the Java or Kotlin standards, except when I had to _really_ understand the borrow checker rules. As I have [written before]( {% ref "2022-11-30-languages-opinion-part-2-rust.markdown" %} ), I am not sure Rust is the best choice for _all_ projects, but where performance and stability matter, it certainly is a great and mature choice.

---

# RJVM retro

I set out to build this thing as a way to learn Rust, without having to deal with networking, too many libraries, or async.

I started by thinking "I will implement a `.class` file parser", and when that was done, I thought "Hmmm I wonder how complicated it is to build a tiny VM that can do some arithmetic". That turned out to be easy. The next step was adding control flow statements, and that was ok too.

But _then_ I decided I wanted to implement strings, and that led me into a deep rabbit hole because I had to actually use the _real_ OpenJDK classes… And, to make that work, I had to fix _many_ bugs in my code and implement a ton of missing bytecode instructions. In the end, the implementation of string literals still feels a bit "hacked together", honestly.

After that was done, I decided "I would love to do exceptions and a GC, and then I will stop", and so I did. Exceptions were not that complicated… but the GC was, because I ended up having to restructure _a lot_ of code to make it work. And it took me three attempts before I settled on an implementation that worked.

I would say that some of the best decisions I took were:

- the integration tests are simple and effective - I have not bothered with a lot of unit tests that check all the error conditions, as one should in a real production project, but after all it was a toy project - you are allowed some shortcuts; 🙂
- the [`Value`](https://github.com/andreabergia/rjvm/blob/main/vm/src/value.rs#L16) enum has been very simple and nice to use. In a real interpreter/VM, where performances and memory usage matter, you would probably use something like [pointer tagging](https://www.npopov.com/2012/02/02/Pointer-magic-for-efficient-dynamic-value-representations.html) or [NaN boxing](https://wingolog.org/archives/2011/05/18/value-representation-in-javascript-implementations), but in my toy, I relied on Rust's facilities and got a lot of help from the compiler for free;
- I am pretty happy with the "switch on bytecode instruction" that I have implemented in [`CallFrame`](https://github.com/andreabergia/rjvm/blob/main/vm/src/call_frame.rs#L349) - I think it's quite readable and simple.

Of course, there are quite some things I'm not happy about. The main ones are:

- I have reused the same data structure for the class parsed from the file, and the class loaded in the VM. I should have used a simpler structure for the loaded class, transforming between the two during class initialization;
- the class loader is a mess and not anything like the JVM says it should be;
- most errors are only really implemented as Rust enums and not as JVM exceptions, which is a bug;
- arrays are a bit patched together - some things that should work do not (like all the `java.lang.Object` methods) and in general they are treated often as a special case;
- the way I have implemented [static fields](https://github.com/andreabergia/rjvm/blob/main/vm/src/vm.rs#L39) is really a horrible hack!

Overall, as a first attempt to build a somewhat realistic VM, I am happy, but it can definitely be done better.

# Conclusion


Finally, I am extremely happy with how this project turned out, for many reasons - one of the biggest is that I have actually _finished a side project_, for once! 🎉 I often start a new project, get to a point where I think "ok I know how to build the rest", and then stop because the fun is gone. This project had one big thing going for it - at the beginning, I did not really know _how_ to build all I wanted to build, so I had to keep going until the end of it. 😅

I had a lot of fun building RJVM and managed to learn _a lot_ of new concepts. I also have realized how little I know and how _complex_ a real, production-level, interpreter or VM, actually is.

---

Learning stuff, having fun, and even getting to be number one on [Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com/) for a few hours. Can't ask for more from a side project. 😊

I want to thank you all for reading this (long) series, and I hope you will keep following my blog in the future.
